docs:#600two stage bootstrap (#700)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/deployment/custom-deployment.mdx

  authentication. You probably still want to enable TLS on the Admin API
  endpoint to protect credentials in flight.

## Override default to start seed nodes

> 
> Previous versions of Redpanda required making sure that each node had a unique `node_id` set in its configuration file and that exactly one node had an empty `seed_servers` set in its configuration file. A single (root) node instantiated the cluster, and other nodes joined it. 
> 
> This is no longer required, but it's supported for backward compatibility. See the [22.2 documentation](https://docs.redpanda.com/docs/deployment/custom-deployment/#configure-seed_servers-list).
> 
> ### Configure seed_servers list
> 
> For backward compatibility, by default, Redpanda expects one node to be started with an empty `seed_servers` list. That node forms a single node cluster and expects other nodes to join it. Other nodes use `seed_servers` to locate nodes that are already members of the cluster to be able to join it. 
> 
> However, when configuring a new cluster, Redpanda recommends that you instead set `empty_seed_starts_cluter` to false and designate some nodes in your cluster as seed nodes. 
> - Redpanda strongly recommends at least three seed nodes when forming a cluster.  
> - Consider the availability of seed nodes. For cluster health, it's important that at least one seed node is always available for other cluster members.
> 
> Each of the designated seed nodes must have the same list of seed nodes, including itself, listed in its `seed_servers` property. For a new cluster to be created, all seed nodes must be started and available to each other. Then they form the initial cluster with all the seed nodes in it. All other (non-seed) nodes use their `seed_servers` property to locate the nodes that are already members of a cluster to join the cluster after it has been initially formed.

Reviewer: How about something like https://docs.google.com/document/d/1kdfZ8HRJGrUavjFpxjggDbGBCduLJHp4nkHiPwg-p8A/edit?usp=sharing:

```suggestion
## Configure the seed servers
Seed servers are servers that direct initial requests from newly started nodes to an existing cluster to help the new nodes join the cluster. The `seed_servers` node configuration property controls how Redpanda finds its peers when initially forming a cluster, depending on how the `empty_seed_starts_cluster` node property is set.
In Redpanda versions v22.3 and above, the `empty_seed_starts_cluster` node property should explicitly be set to `true` on every node, and Redpanda should be configured such that every node in the cluster has the same value set for `seed_servers`. With this set of configurations, Redpanda clusters form with these guidelines:
- When a node starts and it is a seed server (its address is in the `seed_servers` list), it waits for all other seed servers to start up, and forms a cluster with all seed servers as the members.
- When a node starts and it is not a seed server, it sends requests to the seed servers to join the cluster.

It is essential that all seed servers have identical values for the `seed_servers` list. Redpanda strongly recommends at least three seed nodes when forming a cluster. For cluster health, it's important that at least one seed node is always available for other cluster members to discover the cluster.

By default, `empty_seed_starts_cluster` is `false`, and Redpanda will form a cluster based on the guidelines used in Redpanda versions v22.2 and below for backwards compatibility, described below.
- When a node starts with an empty seed_servers list, it creates a single node cluster with itself as the only member.
- When a node starts with a non-empty seed_servers list, it sends requests to the nodes in that list to join the cluster.

If configured with this mode of bootstrapping, it is essential that only one node has an empty seed_servers list.
```

Author: updated

:::important
Redpanda expects its storage to be persistent, and it's an error
to erase a node's drive and restart it. However, in some environments (like when migrating to a different node pool on Kubernetes), truly persistent storage is unavailable,

> and nodes may find their data volumes erased. For such environments, Redpanda recommends setting `empty_seed_starts_cluster` to false and designating a set of seed nodes such that they couldn't lose their storage simultaneously. If that's not possible, consider a legacy approach where the node should not have an empty `seed_servers` list. For more information, see the [22.2 documentation](https://docs.redpanda.com/docs/deployment/custom-deployment/#configure-seed_servers-list). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and nodes may find their data volumes erased. For such environments, Redpanda recommends setting `empty_seed_starts_cluster` to false and designating a set of seed nodes such that they couldn't lose their storage simultaneously.
```

  authentication. You probably still want to enable TLS on the Admin API
  endpoint to protect credentials in flight.

## Configure the seed servers

Seed servers help new nodes join a cluster by directing requests from newly-started nodes to an existing cluster. The `seed_servers` node configuration property controls how Redpanda finds its peers when initially forming a cluster. It is dependent on the `empty_seed_starts_cluster` node configuration property.

> Starting in Redpanda version 22.3, `empty_seed_starts_cluster` should explicitly be set to `true` on every node, and every node in the cluster should have the same value set for `seed_servers`. With this set of configurations, Redpanda clusters form with the following guidelines:

Reviewer: This should be `false`, and L91 should say `true`

Author: thanks @andrwng -- fixed!

> Starting in Redpanda version 22.3, `empty_seed_starts_cluster` should explicitly be set to `false` on every node, and every node in the cluster should have the same value set for `seed_servers`. With this set of configurations, Redpanda clusters form with the following guidelines:

Reviewer 2: @micheleRP Wasn't sure of the meaning of the last line--took a stab at clarifying, but not sure if accurate. Original needed a rewrite for clarity.

> Starting in Redpanda version 22.3, `empty_seed_starts_cluster` should explicitly be set to `false` on every node, and every node in the cluster should have the same value set for `seed_servers`. With this set of configurations, Redpanda clusters form with the following guidelines:

Author: fixed

- When a node starts and it is a seed server (its address is in the `seed_servers` list), it waits for all other seed servers to start up, and it forms a cluster with all seed servers as members.
- When a node starts and it is not a seed server, it sends requests to the seed servers to join the cluster. 
 

> It is essential that all seed servers have identical values for the `seed_servers` list. Redpanda strongly recommends at least three seed nodes when forming a cluster. For cluster health, at least one seed node should always be available for other cluster members to discover the cluster. 

Reviewer 3: @andrwng , @micheleRP
1. ' strongly recommends' why?  Because each seed server decreases the likelihood of unintentionally forming a splt brain cluster.  This is a pretty advanced doc page so should dispense this understanding to the admin

3.  'for cluster health' is vague. What do you mean here?  Rephrase.. e.g 'in order to ensure consensus' @andrwng ?

Reviewer: 1. sgtm
2. Yeah I agree. How about "To ensure nodes can always discover the cluster, at least one seed node should always be available at all times."

Author: thanks, fixed

By default, for backward compatibility, `empty_seed_starts_cluster` is set to `true`, and Redpanda clusters form with the guidelines used prior to version 22.3:
- When a node starts with an empty `seed_servers` list, it creates a single node cluster with itself as the only member.
- When a node starts with a non-empty `seed_servers` list, it sends requests to the nodes in that list to join the cluster. 
 

> If configured with this mode of bootstrapping, it is essential that only one node has an empty `seed_servers` list.

Reviewer 3: @andrwng , @micheleRP  'if configured with this mode' might not be the best way to say it.  We dont want this to be an option.
 
We should just simply state, 'in no circumstances should more than 1 node have an empty seed_servers list, which would result in the creation of multiple clusters'.  This remains true both before and after this release

Author: fixed

:::important
Redpanda expects its storage to be persistent, and it's an error
to erase a node's drive and restart it. However, in some environments (like when migrating to a different node pool on Kubernetes), truly persistent storage is unavailable,
and nodes may find their data volumes erased. For such environments, Redpanda recommends setting `empty_seed_starts_cluster` to false and designating a set of seed nodes such that they couldn't lose their storage simultaneously.
:::

## Configure node IDs 

Redpanda automatically generates unique node IDs for each new node. This means that you don't need to include node IDs in configuration files or worry about policies on `node_id` re-use. 

If you choose to assign node IDs, make sure to use a fresh `node_id` each time you add a node to the cluster.

:::tip

> Be careful not to reuse a node ID; for example, when adding a new node after decommissioning the node with that node ID. Another node replaying its controller log may pass through historical metadata in which it thinks the `node_id` should hold topics that the new node doesn't have. It's not necessary to have low, consecutive node IDs. Node IDs can take any positive value in the 32-bit space.

Reviewer 3: @micheleRP, @andrwng  this is a bit cryptic.

" Another node replaying its controller log may pass through historical metadata in which it thinks the `node_id` should hold topics that the new node doesn't have."

Folks don't need to know about replaying the controller log, and nodes dont 'hold topics' but replicas.

What does this mean from a logical perspective.  I think the message is: Never reuse node ids, even for the same 'local' node.  Once a node is decomissioned its node Id should never be reused. Doing so will can result in an inconsistent state' (or something similar @andrwng  can suggested0

Reviewer: How about

"Never reuse node IDs, even for nodes that have been decommissioned and restarted empty. Doing so can result in inconsistent state."

I'm okay with the warning being vague, as long as it's clear what not to do.

Author: fixed

  authentication. You probably still want to enable TLS on the Admin API
  endpoint to protect credentials in flight.

> ## Backward compatibility: start seed nodes

Author: @andrwng Please let me know what you think about this updated flow: https://deploy-preview-700--redpanda-documentation.netlify.app/docs/deployment/custom-deployment/

Older versions of Redpanda required making sure that each node had a unique `node_id` set in its configuration file and exactly one node had an empty `seed_servers` set in its configuration file. A single (root) node instantiated the cluster, and other nodes joined it. 

> This is supported for backward compatibility. See the [22.2 documentation](https://docs.redpanda.com/docs/deployment/production-deployment/#configure-and-start-the-root-node).

Reviewer: Shouldn't this point to the v22.2 custom deployment docs?

Author: fixed

> ### Configure seed_servers list

Reviewer: It seems odd for this to be a subsection of "Backward compatibility: start seed nodes". If anything, I would have thought it'd be the other way around.

Reviewer: Or more specifically, we should document how to configure seed servers _today_, and just point to older docs and mention the old style still works, rather than repeating that info here.

Author: @andrwng I restructured this and renamed that first para to "Override default to start seed servers". Please review and let me know what you think!

  authentication. You probably still want to enable TLS on the Admin API
  endpoint to protect credentials in flight.

## Override default to start seed nodes

Previous versions of Redpanda required making sure that each node had a unique `node_id` set in its configuration file and that exactly one node had an empty `seed_servers` set in its configuration file. A single (root) node instantiated the cluster, and other nodes joined it. 

This is no longer required, but it's supported for backward compatibility. See the [22.2 documentation](https://docs.redpanda.com/docs/deployment/custom-deployment/#configure-seed_servers-list).

## Configure seed_servers list

> By default, Redpanda starts with three configurable nodes, instantiating a controller Raft group with the seed nodes. The cluster grows as nodes start up. 

Author: thanks @dlex. I've updated this section:  http://localhost:3000/docs/deployment/custom-deployment/#configure-seed_servers-list

> reconcile its local controller log with the controller log from peers.

Author: Thanks @dlex I've revised the note: http://localhost:3000/docs/deployment/custom-deployment/#configure-seed_servers-list.

:::

## Configure node IDs 

Redpanda automatically generates unique node IDs for each new node. This means that you don't need to include node IDs in configuration files or worry about policies on `node_id` re-use. 

If you choose to assign node IDs, make sure to use a fresh `node_id` each time you add a node to the cluster.

:::tip

> Be careful not to reuse a node ID; for example, when adding a new node after decommissioning the node with that node ID. Another node replaying its controller log may pass through historical metadata in which it thinks the `node_id` should hold topics that the new node doesn't have. It's not necessary to have low, consecutive node IDs. Node IDs can take any value in the 32-bit space.

Author: fixed
